welcome back you're watching Al jazer
let's take another quick look at where
things now stand in Israel's war on Gaza
Israeli air strikes have now killed more
than 2,800 Palestinians since this
latest conflict began 9 days ago one in
three of them are children with more
than a thousand killed in just N9 days
the number of Israelis killed in hamas's
military operation now stands at 1,400
including 291 Soldiers the Israeli Army
says that 199 captain are being held by
Hamas in Gaza Israel's prime minister
Benjamin Netanyahu has warned Iran and
Hezbollah not to quote test Israel in
the
north while the conflict between Israel
and Gaza is featuring prominently at the
United Nations let's speak to Christen
salumi she joins us now live from un
headquarters there in New York Kristen a
flurry of activity there today I imagine
amid some very dive humanitarian
warnings that we're
hearing yes and in the last 24 hours the
call for unimpeded access to Gaza for
humanitarian relief has gotten louder
more frequent more urgent from un
officials the Secretary General himself
late on Sunday said that the Middle East
is on the verge of of an abyss uh
responding to the humanitarian agency's
warning that Gaza is about to run out of
food water uh electricity and that
hospitals in fact could have no power in
the next 24 hours
uh making it very difficult to treat the
many wounded people the thousands of
wounded people that they're dealing with
there uh the UN from the beginning has
been pushing back against the idea that
1.1 million people could
evacuate uh from northern Gaza as was
demanded by Israel uh and they have been
pushing the idea and reminding the world
that under international law
humanitarian access protection of
civilians uh is required protection of
the Wounded is something that is
required so that is the message that is
being uh repeated by un officials across
the board here in New York and around
the world the message specifically from
the Secretary General was that Israel
allow unimpeded access to Gaza saying
that they have the supplies ready to go
in and to help people but the Secretary
General also called on Hamas as well to
release all hostages immediately uh uh
in in this as well well that Hamas
should also uh do that without condition
release the hostages so this is what
we're hearing from the UN and the relief
chief for the United Nations Martin
Griffith also uh spoke uh earlier today
he sounded a bit more optimistic he said
he'd been engaging directly with Israel
and Egypt uh that secretary blinken's
visit had been very helpful and that he
was optimistic that there was going to
be an announcement sometime today uh he
was hopeful that there would be an an
announcement sometime today on Aid
getting in but we haven't heard it yet
well speaking of announcements Kristen I
believe there is also a critical vote
being scheduled in the coming hours at
the security
Council well there are actually two
votes uh at least two votes scheduled
now uh in the coming hours two dueling
resolutions have been put forward to the
security Council uh on the situation in
the Middle East the first one was put
forward by Russia calling for an
immediate ceasefire uh and for
uh basically an immediate ceasefire uh
condemning all acts of terrorism and
condemning all violence against
civilians um pretty straightforward
resolution uh but it was objected to
right away from the United States the
United Kingdom other countries who say
that it is important for the security
Council to condemn Hamas they want any
resolution to uh include condemnation of
Hamas uh since Russia put forward that
resolution Brazil came out Brazil holds
the presidency of the security Council
right now they're working on another
version uh on the situation in the
Middle East their version condemns the
October 7th attack by Hamas uh and The
Taking of Civilian hostages but it also
cause for a humanitarian pause a
cessation of hostilities uh to allow for
the aid to get in um Russia is pushing
for amendments on that so there's still
negotiations going on not clear how this
is going to play out any resolution will
need at least nine votes of the security
council's 15 members and none of the
permanent members can use their veto in
order for it to go through so this is
all being negotiated right down to the
minute here um but clearly it's a top
concern for the security Council the
situation in the Middle East and many do
feel that some action needs to be taken
we'll be staying across that for you
here on alaz Christen salumi there for
us at un headquarters thank you Kristen
well joining us now on on set is Aisha
albastri she's a research fellow at the
Arab Center for research and policy
studies Aisha I'm really interested in
the Dynamics of what's going on at the
security Council at the moment so let's
start with this resolution that's being
pushed by Russia what's in it for Moscow
what's their calculus here well there
are right now two uh resolutions two
draft resolutions one pushed from uh by
Russia since Friday and then new one
from Brazil which is the president of
October sessions so uh Russia which was
isolated for quite a long time since the
invasion of of Ukraine uh is trying to
come back to lead at least in this uh
crisis um uh it it is of course you know
focusing on the humanitary access it's
calling on a ceasefire it's also
condemning but condemning both sides uh
the acts of violence is not talking
about one side against the other it's
also calling for theas release of of
hostages so if you look at it is quite
balanced uh but the problem is that it's
Russia who's pushing it for it and
that's probably the main reason why the
US Washington London and Paris has has
rejected it uh I don't think they would
be willing to to give uh Russia a nice
role in this uh in this moment and
that's why uh Brazil came in probably
with with the same idea the core idea is
this the ceasefire the humanitarian ceas
fire but they added the elements that
they want to see which is condemning
Hamas terrorism and acts of violence and
also calling for the the release of
hostages uh I think both resolutions
right now um stand little chance of of
of going through because of the Dynamics
of the five permanent members of the
security Council right now which are
basically still fighting each other and
they're bringing in the uh the the
confrontation of of Ukraine uh in in
this uh in this crisis yeah well as all
of that takes place at the UN obviously
the humanitarian situation is
deteriorating even further and still
we're I believe waiting for Aid to make
it across the border and civilians are
also not able to get out through ruer I
mean there are humanitarian laws
International humanitarian laws that are
meant to stop this from happening what
what kind of accountability can there be
to try to break this kind of impass that
we're seeing well I I think the you just
touched on the main issue the core issue
is the absence of any accountability
when it comes to Israel and Israeli
crimes uh since its establishment it's
been committing horrendous crimes um you
know the the Jewish Community uh and
Jewish genocide Scholars have been
recently voicing their concern and
warning against genocide and genocide
enement in in recent uh in the recent
war in Gaza and and this this kind of
blockades the intent of to destroy a
group which is Hamas but but all gasms
in in in Gaza to destroy them and
inflicting upon them conditions of life
that are calculated to destroy that
group which is basically the definition
of genocide so the when a state uh has
been allowed by all International System
by the international justice system to
commit such crimes and go away with it
with mass murder with crimes against
humanity and with genocide uh you cannot
talk about accountability and that's why
we're here because no one is has been
able to to hold uh the Israel to account
well let me ask you then about any kind
of path forward we've been talking for
days now about any kind of mediation
efforts we obviously know that there's
Egypt has a huge part to play and we've
not seen a huge amount of movement
happen at the Crossing even though there
there was talk of that in the last few
days there is I believe meant to now be
a Cairo Summit this weekend what do you
make of regional mediation efforts it
does feel like a lot of people have
their own a lot of countries have a lot
of their own interests at heart it's
true a lot of con countries are
concerned um you know Egypt I think in
in the region will be the first country
to be concerned of what's happening it's
been voicing his concern from the
beginning that it would not allow
a a a a force displacement and a refugee
problem in its country this is what
Israel was was uh I mean at the
beginning at least was was heading to
was pushing the the uh the gazin towards
South toward Egypt and Egypt refused
that so Egypt has a lot at stake in this
in this war but also we have Jordan
Jordan also is is is very concerned if
of for if the scenario if the scenario
of transfer force transfer in Egypt
works then they are next and then you
have of course other countries in region
but I'm afraid that the uh the who is
calling the shot is the is is Washington
and Washington is being align itself
with Israel without any sort of
distantiation or um you know kind of
critical Voice or critical uh Insight in
into into this position so the I I think
that only Washington can can exert some
some sort of influence right now over
over Israel and it's not doing it it's
been from day one uh associating the
Hamas operation which is a resistance
movement after all has been associating
with dases with Isis crimes and uh to to
to allow a sort in association with
September 11th and uh addressing this
situation as a terrorist situation and
that's that's that's the main problem is
that Washington has not uh distanced
itself from Israel's role and from from
Israel extremist extremist decision to
uh to to uh impose a blockade on on
entire population Aisha albastri
research fellow at the Arab Center for
research and policy studies great to
talk to you here on aler thank you for
joining us Aisha you're welcome